### CMS - Directus + postgres + redis + mailhog

# Directus Boilerplate 🚀

A production-ready, local-development-friendly boilerplate for spinning up a [Directus](https://directus.io) headless CMS instance with Docker. Get a full stack (Directus, PostgreSQL, Redis, MailHog) running with a single command.

## Why Use This Boilerplate?
*   **🧪 Production Parity:** Can mirror a production environment locally, ensuring your development and production setups are consistent. You can build and update your directus data model locally and push a prod ready image.
*   **✨ Zero-Config Setup:** Clone, run `task up`, and you're done.
*   **🧰 Sanity test:** Quickly test new directus releases locally before deploying.
*   **📦 Pre-configured Services:** Directus, Postgres, Redis, and MailHog for email testing.
*   **🔧 Extension Builder:** Automatically builds custom Directus extensions on startup.
*   **📊 Schema Management:** Easy import/export of your Data Model schema.
*   **📧 Email Testing:** Captures emails sent by Directus for easy debugging with MailHog.
*   **🔄 CI/CD Ready:** Includes a GitHub Actions workflow to build and push Docker images automatically.
*   **👥 Consistent dev environment:** possibility for different actors in a team to build model and test.

## Getting Started
**Perequisites:
*   Docker & Docker Compose
-   [Task](https://taskfile.dev) (optional but recommended for easier task management)
-   if you intend to restore a database dump from a remote, you have ssh access to the remote.

## Useful Commands
Run `task` in the root directory of this repository. you should see a list of available commands.
```task
task: Available tasks for this project:
* default:                 Show available tasks
* up:                      build extensions and run docker compose
* clean:                   Stop and remove all containers, volumes, and images
* down:                    Shutdown and remove containers without deleting volumes
* restart:                 Force recreate and restart all containers
* db:restore:              Restore database from remote backup
* export:schema:           export the directus schema
* extensions:build:        loop through all extensions and run npm run build
```

## Quick Start
1. **Clone the repository**
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/lowesilvan/directus-boilerplate.git
    cd directus-boilerplate
    ```
2.  **Launch the stack**
    ```bash
    task up
    ```
    This will build the image, start all containers, and build any extensions.
3.  **Open Directus**
      Navigate to `http://localhost:8055`
     *   **Email:** `admin@application.com`
     *   **Password:** `application`
4.  **Check emails (optional)**
    View captured emails in MailHog at `http://localhost:8025`

## Project Structure
```plaintext
.
├── docker-compose.yml # Defines all services
├── Taskfile.yml # Task runner commands
├── directus/schema/
│ ├── export.sh # Script to dump the schema from the docker container
│ └── snapshot.yaml # Your Data Model schema
└── directus/extensions/ # custom extensions here
└── directus/templates/email #  custome mail templates here
└── .github/workflows/ci.yml # Github actions workflow to build docker image
``` 

## How to work with schema updates

On startup, `directus` executes the script `./directus/schema/start.sh` updating the schema to the snapshot in `./directus/schema/snapshot.yaml`.

If you want to export a directus schema, run `task export:schema` this will execute the `./schema/export.sh` script. It saves the container schema to `./directus/schema/snapshot.yaml`.
```task
task export:schema
```
note: the compose stack has to be up and running.

you can build a new image locally with the updated schema by running:
```task
task restart
```

or commit your updated snapshot file, and trigger the CI workflow to build a new image and push it to your docker registry.


## Docker volumes mapping
When running directus with docker, the data is persisted in volumes. The following directory and volumes are mapped to directus containers:

  // local directory
- `./directus/schema` contains schema files
  
// docker volumes
- `directus_postgres_data` contains all postgres database files
- `directus_postgres_backup` contains generated database backup
- `directus_upload_data` contains all media files uploaded in directus
- `directus_extensions_data` contains all directus extensions
- `directus_logs_data` all in-app logs generated by directus

## How to restore database from production
task db:restore will restore the database from a remote server. It will download the latest backup from the remote server and restore it to the compose postgres database.
You should have configured ssh config to access the remote server.

note: 
- this will overwrite the current database, so make sure you have a backup of your current database if you need to. 
- update the db:restore task with your remote server details in the `Taskfile.yml` file.
```task
task db:restore
```

## clean
To clean up all containers, volumes, and images, run:
```task
task clean
```
